# About

`scrum` is a simple command line utility that provides useful scrum metrics to
assist a Scrum team in their Transparency, Inspection and Adaptation.

Like Scrum, `scrum` is lightweight and simple to understand. Unlike Scrum,
`scrum` is easy to master.

# Why

There are many issue tracking and "agile" tools in the wild. In many cases
these tools are _actually_ wild in one or more of the following ways:

- complexity
- cost
- ignorant simplicity
- integration

These tools usually sit further away from where the _end result_ is happening
in code.

GitHub provides simple and lightweight Issue Tracking and Project Management
but lacks useful reporting that helps a Scrum team inspect and adapt.

If you are _already_ using GitHub why introduce cognitive complexity by having
_another_ tool for project management. Keep everything in one place - the code,
the issues, the wiki, the reporting.

# Features

Sensible defaults, easily configurable.

## Initializing Scrum

In `scrum` you can declaratively define the components of your GitHub
repository including:

- Project Board structure

- Issue Labels

- Project Wiki Pages

- Static site for the reporting Dashboard

## Starting a Sprint

Tell `scrum` when you are starting your Sprint and the duration and `scrum`
will:

- Create a GitHub Milestone, with the Sprint end date and Sprint Name

- Create a boilerplate Wiki page for the retrospective

- Create a Google Calendar event with the team as invitees for:

  - Sprint Planning
  - Daily Scrum
  - Sprint Review
  - Sprint Retrospective

- Populate a Card on a GitHub Project Board with the Sprint Goal

## Ending a Sprint

When your Sprint ends `scrum` will:

- Close the Milestone on GitHub

- Unset the Sprint Goal from the Project Board

- Ask if you want to automatically start a new Sprint.

- Archive the old Sprint configuration.

## Transparency

`scrum` produces useful documents that help improve Transparency, namely:

- Burndown/up Chart

- Sprint Velocity

- Defects trend (requires the label `type: bug`)

## Dashboard

Utilizing GitHub Actions `scrum` can automatically run and build a reporting
dashboard that compares two points in time. This helps all team members ask
better questions such as "What has moved since yesterday?".

This reporting dashboard is published as a static site to GitHub Pages or any
other static site hosting provider.

The GitHub Action that triggers a Dashboard build can be generated by a variety
of events or a cron schedule. Useful if you want to have a dashboard updated on
a ticket `transfer` event or built 5 minutes before your Daily Scrum event.

You can even build your dashboard into part of your CI/CD pipeline.

# Usage

`scrum` is a small CLI with only a few simple commands:

```
$ scrum help
Scrum is a tool for accelerating Scrum teams that use GitHub.

Usage:

        scrum <command> [arguments]

The commands are:

        auth        authenticates `scrum` with GitHub using OAuth.
        init        initialize a GitHub repo with a `scrum` configuration.
        next        starts a new sprint.
        close       stops a sprint. Primarily used to cancel a sprint.
        report      generate a useful report based on the scrum activity.

Use "scrum help <command>" for more information about a command.
```

# Important Files

All `scrum` configuration resides in `.scrum/` directory and should be
committed to .git.

The `.scrum` folder consists of:

- `config.yaml`

- `scrum.yaml`

- `events/`

- `participants.yaml`

## config.yaml

The config yaml contains the authentication information to connect to GitHub.

## scrum.yaml

The `scrum.yaml` describes the desired state of your GitHub Project. Labels
are set a key:value pairs to enable parsing for reports.

```yaml
# scrum.yaml
board:
  columns:
    - Todo
    - In Progress
    - Peer Review
    - QA
    - Done

labels:
  point: # generates labels such as `point: 0`, `point: 1` ... with the label color `#f9d0c4`
    - 0
    - 1
    - 2
    - 3
    - 5
    - 8
    - 13
    - 20
    - 40
    - 100
    color: '#f9d0c4'
  type:
    - epic
    - user-story
    - tech-story
    - bug
    color: '#cfg0c4'

wiki:
  - Home
  - Sprints # When a Sprint is started a wiki page is added under the `Sprints` page. One wiki page per sprint.
```

## events/current.yaml

The `events` directory contains the data for the current sprint in a
declarative format. Historic sprint definitions in `previous` sub-directory.

```yaml
# current.yaml
events:
  type: sprint
  name: "Curious Penguin" # names can be automatically generated
  goal: "Our sprint goal is to add customer value."
  details:
    start: "2020-04-01"
    duration:
      value: 21
      unit: days
    frequency: once

  type: daily
  name: 'Daily Scrum'
  details:
    start: "2020-04-01"
    duration:
      value: 15
      unit: minutes
    frequency: daily

  type: planning
  name: 'Sprint Planning'
  details:
    start: "2020-04-01"
    duration:
      value: 4
      unit: hours
    frequency: once

  type: retro
  name: 'Sprint Retrospective'
  details:
    start: "2020-04-22"
    duration:
      value: 4
      unit: hours
    frequency: once

  type: review
  name: 'Sprint Review'
  details:
    start: "2020-04-22"
    duration:
      value: 4
      unit: hours
    frequency: once

wiki: # define the generally structure of the Sprint wiki page. All the Sprint documentation lives on a single wiki page.
  headings:
    - Goal
    - Retrospective
```

## participants.yaml

`participants.yaml` defines groups of individuals that may be invited to Scrum
events.

```yaml
#participants
team: &team
  "Joe Blogs": userA@company.com
  "John Doe": userB@company.com
  "Chuck Norris": userC@company.com

daily: # if there is a matching value for the `type` key in `scrum.yaml` these participants will be added to the invite list when scheduling events.
  <<: *team

planning:
  <<: *team

review:
  <<: *team
  "Jane Doe": stakeholder@external.com

retro:
  <<: *team
```

`scrum` can also reference a secured remote url to fetch the participants list
if committing emails into git history is a concern.
